---
layout: post
date: 2020-06-29
permalink: /blog/nowReading
comments: true
title: Personal Reading List
mathjax: true
---
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="all" href="readingListStylesheet.css" />


**Last updated: 16 July 2020**

&#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; = Strongly Recommended

&#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; = Recommended

&#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; = Enjoyable

&#x2B50; &#x2B50; = Not Recommended

&#x2B50; = Steer Clear

&#x1F4D6; = Now Reading/Last Read 

&#x1f4d5; = To be read

### **Academic / Textbooks**
1. Optimal Control - Dan Liberzon  &#x1F4D6;
2. Bayesian Networks - Judea Pearl &#x1f4d5;
3. Bandits and Online learning - Tor Lattimore &#x1F4D6;
4. Causality - Judea Pearl &#x1f4d5;
5. AI: A Modern Approach - Peter Norvig and Stuart Russell &#x1f4d5;
6. Reinforcement Learning &#x1F4D6;

### **Non Fiction**
1. <div class='left'>  Weapons of Math destruction - Cathy O'Neil </div> <div class='right'> &#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; </div>
2. <div class='left'> Sapiens - YNH </div> <div class='right'> &#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50;</div>
3. <div class='left'> Homo Deus - YNH </div> <div class='right'>&#x2B50; &#x2B50; &#x2B50;</div>
4. The Selfish Gene - Richard Dawkins
5.  Thinking fast and slow - Daniel Kahnman
6. 21 lessons for the 21st century - YNH
7. You are a Badass - Jen Sincero
11. The Machine Stops - Short story by E. M. Forster
8. The power of habit - Charles Duhigg &#x1f4d5;
10. Deep Work - Cal Newport
9. The Extended phenotype - Richard Dawkins
10. Enlightenment Now - Steven Pinker
11. Think and Grow Rich - Napoleon Hill
12. The Science of Getting Rich - Wallace Wattles

### **Fiction**
1. Solaris - Stanislaw Lem
2. Machines Who Think - Pamela McCorduck
3. The Everything Store - Brad Stone
4. A Brief History of Time - Stephen Hawking
5. The Emperor's New Mind - Roger Penrose and follow up by Stuart hameroff
    - Do anesthetics (gas) affect the microtubules directly. Is this a special chemical 7. process?
    - This thread is essentially a connection between Quantum mechanics and Consciousness
6. Cycles of time - Roger Penrose
7. Shadows of the mind - Roger Penrose
8. The road to reality - Roger Penrose
8. The Black Cloud - Hoyle
11. Creation Revisited - Peter Atkins (Yes the Chemist)
12. Simulacron-3 - Galouye
14. Origin of species - Darwin
15. Mendelian Genetics
16. Dark Universe - Galouye
17. A for Andromeda - Fred Hoyle
18. Books by Arthur C Clarke
19. Einstein's Dreams - Alan Littman
20. Communist Manifesto - Marx and Engels
21. Free to choose - Milton Freidman
22. The Wealth of Nations - Adam Smith
23. One, Two, Three...Infinity
Book - George Gamow (A Physicist)
    - Many topics
24. Reflections on Language - Noam Chomsky
25. The Blind Watchmaker - Richard Dawkins
26. Ever since Darwin - Steven J Gould
27. Books by the George A. Miller
28. What everybody is saying - Joe Navarro
        - Non verbal cues/language
29. The Second World War - Winston Churchill
30. Masters of Doom - David Kushner
31. Code Complete - Steve McConnel - Software Development
32. Ikigai - Hector Garcia
33. Love and Math - Edward Frenkel - The beauty and power of mathematics
34. Book of Why - Judea Pearl
35. Homo Ludens - Johan Huizinga
36. The Double Helix - James Watson
37. The Road to Reality - Roger Penrose
38. On Intelligence - Jeff Hawkins and Sandra Blakeslee
- Recommended by Nitin Pai @acorn
39. David Robson's The Intelligence Trap
40. Carlo Cipolla's The Basic Laws of Human Stupidity

